---
layout: post
title: Project 1 Reflection
---

After completing the first R Project of the semester, I have several thoughts.

First, here is a link to my project: [project](https://saararaja.github.io/ST558---Project1/)

This was the first time that I used Github directly integrated with my coding environment (rather than just uploading my completed project at the end), and I was surprised at how simple it was!  It was definitely very simple to create the repository and connect to R Studio, and to push changes to my master branch ever so often.  I am curious about how exactly to utilize the version control feature.  After all, that is the entire purpose of Github, but I would like to understand how in practice I can revert my work to a previous version and work off it.

As far as how I approached this project, it started with a lot of research.  I have not worked with JSON data before, so I had to start by looking up what it is, how it is structured, and how to use it.  It makes sense, and I am glad that I have an understanding of it now so that I can work directly with web data.  From there, I had to figure out how to then convert the json data into a useable form.  This was probably the most difficult for me.  Because of the nested data format, I wasn't able to get it into a neat dataframe at first.  I tried using `jsonlite`, but it generated a dataframe with nested dataframes as the columns, and I wasn't able to use `dplyr` with it.  Luckily I found `tidyjson` which was able to easily do the trick.  I would like to spend more time with `jsonlite` to gain a better understanding of how to use it properly.

Apart from the json data aspect, I also had difficulties with some of the graphs when it came to data that is already summarized.  The goalie and skaters tables came pre-summarized with the numbers of wins, losses, etc already given per player.  Because of this, I was not sure how to use this information in bar charts.  I figured out that this can be achieved using the `stat=identity` option within `geom_bar`, but I could not figure out how to then make a side-by-side bar plot with pre-summarized data. I would like to study this further to be able to create visuals like this in the future.

The big take-aways from this project that R is great for exploratory analysis because you can essentially create anything that you want.  When you use a visualizing tool such as Tableau or even MS Excel, there are limits to what type of visuals you can produce.  Since ggplot2 graphs are built using layers, the possibilities are endless as long as you have ideas and the knowledge to code them.  I am definitely excited to learn more about R and become more fluent to use it in real work applications. 
