---
layout: post
title: A Reflection on Data Science
---

Prompt: What do you think being a data scientist is about?  What do you see as the major duties and/or knowledge areas?  What differences/similarities do you see between data scientists and statisticians?  How do you view yourself in relation to these two areas?

As a relatively new field, there seems to be quite a bit of ambiguity surrounding what exactly Data Science is, and what it's relation is to the field of Statistics.  Different employers have different ideas, and candidates themselves have different ideas on what skills they should posses.

I am someone who works in the field of Data Science currently, and am definitely affected by this ambiguity in definition.  The majority of my coworkers all have their PhDs, but not in a discipline that you would expect (Statistics, Computer Science, Math).  Instead they come from a wide array of backgrounds: Electrical Engineering, Chemistry, Materials Science.  I myself have a background in Neuroscience and am currently working on enhancing my statistical background by pursuing the online statistics master's degree program at NC State University.  Based on my real world experience, I have to disagree with the articles that subject matter expertise is one of the key requirements of a Data Scientist.  Neither I nor any of my colleagues have a background in banking or finance, but we are able to successfully work in Data Science at a banking institution.  I believe that assembling a team of Data Scientists from vastly different backgrounds, so long as they have the sufficient coding and statistical expertise, is an asset in that each individual brings their unique perspective to the table, which aids in problem solving without having a "one-track mind".

Overall, I think being a Data Scientist is about solving real business problems using data.  It involves exploring and understanding, studying different algorithms or business rules, but also keeping the stakeholders and business requirements in mind for the entire process.  Requirements for a particular project are constantly evolving, and therefore solutions need to be flexible as well.  Models also pose inherent risk to organizations based on their probabilistic nature, so a Data Scientist should be able to effectively communicate and defend their decisions.  

I believe that the major knowledge areas for a Data Scientist should be Statistics, Computer Science, and Business with key skills being programming, exploring and visualizing data, and understanding how to customize algorithms based on the problem at hand.  I see the field of Data Science and Statistics as highly related, though in Data Science, measures such as statistical significance and other metrics are not nearly as important as human context.  There is also a lot less classical statistics, and a much higher reliance on machine learning model approaches.  I view myself more as a Data Scientist than a Statistician, because while my technical skills are still in progress, my ability to analyze data, problem solve, and communicate ideas effectively to stakeholders has made me an effective member of my Data Science Team.
